Modern Physics
1 The experimental basis of quantum physics.
2 Structure of the atom, de Broglie waves.
3 Wave functions, Schrödinger equation.
4 Particle in a box, quantum tunneling.
5 Atomic physics: hydrogen atom, quantum numbers, Zeeman effect, total angular
momentum.

Solid State Physics
6 Phonons in solids: heat capacity of solids, Bose–Einstein statistics, phonon dispersion
relations, chain models, density of states, Debye model.
7 Electrons in metals: From Drude theory to free electron model, Fermi–Dirac statistics,
electron dispersion relation, density of states.
8 Structure of crystalline solids: lattice, reciprocal lattice, Brillouin zone, symmetries,
scattering experiments (Bragg’s law, structure & form factor).
9 Electronic bands in solids: nearly free electron model, Bloch's theorem, electronic bands
of a chain, metals and insulators.
10 Electrons in solids II: tight-binding approximation, effective mass, metals and
insulators.

Quantum Physics
11 Linear algebra and quantum postulates.
12 Two-levels systems, Rabi oscillations.
13 Quantum harmonic oscillator.
14 Quantum entanglement, quantum advantage.
15 Quantum applications: lasers, NV centers.

Nano and Quantum Phenomena in Solids
16 Semiconductor physics and devices.
17 Basic nano phenomena: quantum dots and quantum wires.
18 Non-equilibrium distribution function and the Boltzmann equation; calculation of the
conductance.
19 Magnetism: atomic magnetic moment, Hund’s rule, exchange energy, mean-field theory,
magnetic ordering.
20 Superconductivity: macroscopic wave function and Meissner effect; some quantum
devices: Josephson junction, SQUID and transmon.









4. The outer product of a vector with itself, |ψ⟩ ⟨ψ|, is Hermitian.
5. Given a k-dimensional subspace of C^n with 1 ≤ k ≤ n, and the orthonormal
basis {|ϕ1⟩, . . . |ϕk⟩} of this subspace, the projector onto that subspace is
P = sum_i=1 to k |ϕi⟩ ⟨ϕi| . 

6. All projectors are Hermitian.
7. Any projector P satisfies P^2 = P.
9. A matrix A is normal, if AA† = A†A.


transmon is equivalent to quantum pendulum




During induced emission, the atom is excited by emitting a photon with the same energy
(wavelength),
the same momentum and phase as the photon.


spin 1/2 pauli matrices are rank 2 
spin 1   pauli matrices are rank 2 (even though they are 3x3)





Questions:

Can a Hermitian operator not be full rank? can it have some eigenvalues with 0? can it not have a full set of eigenvectors that span the whole space?

the second postulate of quantum mechanics is that time evolution in a closed system is unitary, or equivalently Schrodinger's equation. Question: why is this time evolution given so much importance. In more advanced QM courses, I learned about symmetries, transformations, unitary, canonical, Noether's theorem. In those cases, time evolution looks like just another continuous transformation, generated by some operator. I don't see why it would be more fundamental (to the point of being an postulate/axiom), compared to other transformations, like space, rotations, parity, etc...
Please fix any misconceptions if I have (wrong premises in my question). I know quite a bit of QM, and a lot of classical mechanics, etc... give me a really good profound answer, be very clear about definitions, very precise. offer rigor and intuition

I understand that in non-relativistic QM, time is not in equal footing wrt space (which relativistic QM fixes)

Q: Does Debye use continuous frequencies? I think Einstein uses discrete frequencies, but maybe for integrals we use continuous? or are boundary conditions used to quantize these frequencies

I am thinking about band gaps and electrons going from valence to conduction band. Normally we show the dispersion relation showing how the energy depends on k. if you have a direct transition, k is unchanged and E changes (by +E_gap), how is this possible? is the energy going somewhere else. maybe the answer is trivial like: the k part of the energy is just the kinetic, but the one associated with the transition is potential energy. clarify. maybe the dispersion relation is not just this k^2component

MOSFET: does the applied gate voltage V_g affect the chemical potential? or only the position of the conduction band? as I understand, as you apply a voltage (positive for npn), the conduction band bends and its energy is lower, until for V_g > V_threshold the E_c is lower than mu chemical potential, so electrons can use it and conduct. 

I want to know how the eigenstates and eigenvalues of composite systems work when you have interacting and non-interacting. Assume two systems with a local observable A with eigenvector eigenvalue pairs lambda_i,v_i for the first and local observable B with eigenvector eigenvalue pairs k_i,w_i for the second. now explain how the eigenvalues and eigenvectors will be for
A tensor I
I tensor B 
A tensor B
A tensor I + I tensor B 
A tensor I + I tensor B + A tensor B

and state the general case.

in Schrodinger equation, do we use total or partial time derivative and position derivative (in the position basis, and in general).

Quantum harmonic oscillator. I already used variantional principle to get the energy using a gaussian trial function. I want to solve the problem using the Heisenberg picture. I already expressed a_H = a * exp(-iwt) and a_H^dagger = a^dagger * exp(iwt), and the x and p operators in the heisenberg picture. But I don't know how to proceed after that. continue from where I left off, and completely solve the problem. do everything that can be done in Heisenberg picture.

Stationary states in a ring can carry nonzero particle current!
is the current steady state?

how is the correlation between two observables calculated? I saw one formula where it's the expected value (using the system's wavefunction)  of the tensor product of the observables? why

it's not clear to me what a heterostructure is? is it like a mixture of two compounds typically found at the boundary?



Principles:

for each topic, try to understand what are the fundamental properties of the system, the theory and the model. Gain full knowledge and deep understanding by explicitly stating what are the core principles and postulates that make the system what it is
For example: in quantum physics, for a given phenomena, like tunneling, what are the core differences that make tunneling (impossible in classical physics) possible. what do I start with. For example, continuity of wave function, it vanishing at infinity (i think this leads to an exponential solution, which has some leakage), what else...?
what other quantum behavior/phenomena is explainable by the same core principles (maybe scattering and tunneling), and what are the similarities and differences?

for the experimental basis of QM, what core experimental results can not be explained by classical theory? what postulates of classical theory make them impossible? how are these related to the postulates of quantum mechanics? do these belong to a larger class of quantum phenomena?
for example, photo electric effect is related to the quantization of energy levels in an atom, but how does quantization emerge in quantum mechanics? is the continuity of wave function + boundary conditions enough? (because they imply a harmonic solution, with nodes at the boundaries, so you have something like a sin(kx) and k is quantized)
but can we even be more general and fundamental? can we go to the core behavior

always start with the core basics that define the system. start with the symmetries, conserved quantities, boundary conditions, quantizations, representations.
always explain which are postulates/axioms, and which are derivations. also what is the scope of the model, for example, a model for the heat capacity of solids applies to... solids. Then what are the core features of solids (include the definition of a solid), which makes it so that the model applies only to them? (also you may clarify if the model applies also to non-solids, and why, and in what limit). It's great to explain clearly what properties of the system (like it being a solid) are required for the derivations involved in the creation of the model, and also to point out when these fail (for example by showing why a model for a solid would fail for a fluid)

For context: I am very smart and I have studied very advanced topics, grad level classical mechanics, advanced quantum mechanics, I understand symmetries, operators, transformations, Noether's theorem, generators of transformations, etc... I struggle to see the big picture. I have a lot of knowledge and understanding, that you should leverage, so you can connect the examples and particular cases with the general theory of quantum mechanics

also it's great when we have two different models (which are approximations), which are different, but both explain the same phenomena, like for heat capacity of solids: Debye and Einstein. And I love to see, how in some limit, both approach the same description, and how their differences vanish, and how both capture the core fundamental properties of the model (and please make explicit what the "core fundamental properties of the model" are), (or I think tight binding and almost free electron model (like a free electron but we add some perturbation theory with the potential) are also both in the limit equivalent, and then they also reproduce the Petit-Dulong law)




















Studying the Jaynes-Cummings model in interaction picture: I see that hamiltonian is divided in 3 parts, and every operator evolves with the energy of its part. like very decoupled. QM2, sheet1 ex12


I have a quantum state which is the superposition of many eigenstates. can the time evolution or an observable of an eigenstate be impacted by the other eigenstates
like what I think is that if I have eigenstates of the H Hamiltonian, then each should evolve "independently", and then when you look at the total time evolution, then it is just the linear superposition, and with unitary time evolution then coefficients or amplitudes are conserved. I am kind of like thinking if there is any exception to this. The nice thing about QM is that you can use superposition to simplify many things. I want to know if there are exceptions to this where some eigenstate couples to something or to other eigenstates and this causes an unexpected effect. I'm guessing this shouldn't happen under unitary time evolution, or with well defined eigenstates, but I'm not 100% sure. I want to know if there are some well known studied cases.